1:
********
NORMAL EMBRYOLOGY AND DEVELOPMENT
Mammary glands are modified sweat glands of ectodermal 
origin that produce milk.1,2 It is likely that the close embry-
ologic origin of salivary, sweat, and mammary glands relates 
to the often similar morphologic appearance and immuno-
phenotype of tumors arising in these locations. During 
embryogenesis, breast tissue develops in both sexes along 
the paired milk lines, which extend from the axilla to the 
inguinal region.3-10 In humans, only one gland normally 
develops on each side in the pectoral area, but two types of 
ectopic breast may occur. First, supernumerary breast has 
been observed in axillary lymph nodes as well as along the 
milk line that runs from the axilla to the inguinal region. 
The most common sites are the chest wall and the vulva. 
Second, aberrant breast tissue is mammary parenchyma 
found beyond the normal anatomic extent. The mammary 
gland is not a sharply demarcated organ, and isolated 
mammary lobules can occur outside the standard anatomic 
confines of the breast parenchyma, such as in the nipple or 
in the axilla (axillary tail of Spence). This explains the 
occurrence of some primary breast carcinomas in the axil-
lary region. Ectopic breast parenchyma is subject to lacta-
tional changes as well as the development of both benign 
and malignant tumors.

Postnatally, in girls, the breasts undergo considerable 
development at puberty under the influence of prolactin, 
estrogen, and progesterone.3-10 Boys may experience mild, 
transient breast enlargement at puberty, but there is nor-
mally little additional development, and the mammary 
gland remains rudimentary. In women, breast development 
peaks around age 20 years and is maintained through the 
reproductive years; atrophic changes begin at about age 40 
years and accelerate postmenopausally. Estrogen promotes 
mammary differentiation of the duct system, whereas pro-
gesterone is important in lobular development. Clearly, 
prolactin is permissive for the action of estrogen and pro-
gesterone; however, insulin, growth hormone, human pla-
cental lactogen, and thyroxin contribute to normal mammary 
gland development.3-10
********
ANATOMYThe breast is covered by skin and subcutaneous tissue and 
lies superficial to the pectoralis muscle, from which it is 
separated by the pectoralis fascia.4 It lies within a space of 
the superficial fascia. Except along its deep surface, the 
2:
breast is not precisely defined; microscopic extensions of 
parenchyma occur beyond these boundaries and, rarely, 
even into the pectoralis fascia. These extensions explain the 
rare development of additional breast primary carcinomas 
in women after simple mastectomy. The major arteries to 
the breast are the internal thoracic, axillary, and intercostal, 
with many variations in their individual contributions. The 
internal thoracic artery is dominant in most cases. The 
venous and lymphatic drainage is even more variable, but 
it usually follows the arterial tree.3-10 Indeed, breast lym-
phatics “hug” the arterial and venous systems, directing 
lymphatic flow along the course of the branches of the 
external thoracic and internal thoracic veins toward the 
axillary and internal mammary nodes. There is also a sub-
areolar lymphatic plexus that allows lymphatic drainage 
from skin into the interlobular connective tissue of the 
breast and subsequently to the general breast parenchymal 
lymphatic flow. From the breast parenchyma, 75% or more 
of the lymphatic flow is to the axilla; less than 25% is 
to the internal mammary nodes. A third and minor flow 
route is to the posterior intercostal lymph nodes located 
where the ribs and vertebrae articulate. Obstruction due to 
lymphatic invasion by tumor may disrupt normal flow pat-
terns, resulting in considerable edema and surface skin 
changes (peau d’orange); this is considered “inflammatory” 
breast carcinoma clinically because the changes resemble 
cellulitis.
The nipple-areolar complex of the breast skin is a disk 
of increased pigmentation. The centrally disposed nipple 
has 15 to 25 large collecting ducts (nipple lactiferous ducts) 
opening individually onto the nipple surface.3-10 The nipple 
and areola also contain numerous sebaceous glands that 
open independently of hair follicles. Eccrine and apocrine 
sweat glands are present and probably account for the 
rare skin adnexal tumors that can occur in this area. Inter-
mediate in structure between sweat glands and breast are 
accessory areolar glands (Montgomery’s tubercles).3-10 These 
present as areolar protuberances, usually about 20 in 
number, which become prominent during pregnancy. They 
are formed by a distinct areolar lactiferous duct associated 
with a sebaceous gland. These areolar lactiferous ducts are 
linked to lobular breast parenchyma located deep to the 
areola, and they rarely become the site of breast disease. 
Beneath the epidermis lies a dense fibrous stroma admixed 
with erectile smooth muscle fibers. About 17% of nipples 
contain normal breast lobules.3
During the reproductive years, the basic ductular unit of 
the breast is the combination of multiple terminal duct 
lobular units (TDLUs) or lobules and their attached single 
collecting duct system, which ends at the nipple. The TDLU 
is formed by the small acini or alveoli within a lobule and 
the terminal ductule (Figs. 19-1 and 19-2). The TDLU rep-
resents the secretory portion of the gland. The terminal 
ductule connects to the subsegmental duct, which connects 
to a segmental duct; this in turn connects to a collecting 
(lactiferous or galactophorous) duct, which empties into 
the nipple. A fusiform dilation beneath the nipple between 
the collecting and segmental ducts is called the lactiferous 
each unit defines a functional breast lobe. Unfortunately, 
there are no gross or microscopic landmarks that allow the 
definition of individual lobes, which overlap considerably 
with adjacent lobes. Radiopaque dye injected into an indi-
vidual lactiferous duct may help define the anatomic extent 
of a lobe. Excision of the breast lobe in a conical fashion 
toward the nipple may be a rational surgical approach in 
the treatment of carcinoma in situ, which theoretically 
should be limited to the collecting system of one breast lobe 
duct system ending or emptying at the nipple.
Within a TDLU is an intralobular mantle of specialized 
stroma, which is variably myxoid and hormone responsive, 
lacks elastic fibers, and contains many capillaries (see Fig. 
19-2).4 The intralobular stroma is derived from the fetal 
papillary dermis. The subsegmental and larger ducts 
have less specialized stroma and are surrounded by a well-
developed layer of elastic tissue. These larger ducts lie 
within the interlobular or extralobular stroma, composed 
of variable fat and densely collagenized fibrous tissue, which 
contains the larger blood vessels and lymphatics of the 
3:
breast (Fig. 19-3). The extralobular stroma develops from 
the fetal reticular dermis, and it extends from the breast 
parenchyma to the skin, forming the suspensory ligaments 
of Cooper. The duct system of the breast is composed pri-
marily of a two-cell epithelial lining: the inner, secretory, 
acinar, or duct luminal epithelium and a surrounding or 
outer myoepithelial cell layer (Fig. 19-4). A much smaller 
population of endocrine cells as well as intermediate cells 
(indeterminate or basal clear cells) has been identified.4,8 
These intermediate cells may be multipotential precursor 
cells.
Ductal or acinar epithelial cells react strongly with anti-
bodies to cytokeratins 18 and 19 as well as with epithelial 
membrane antigen, human milk fat globule membrane 
antigen, and α-lactalbumin.8 Myoepithelial cells are con-
tractile and have both myogenous and epithelial features. 
They contain bundles of thin filaments with focal densities 
(i.e., actin filaments) as well as tonofilaments and desmo-
somes. Myoepithelial cells are calponin, p63, smooth muscle 
actin, CD10, and cytokeratin 14 positive (Fig. 19-5). Anti-
bodies to S-100 protein react with both ductal and myo-
epithelial cells, and anti–epithelial membrane antigen 
preferentially reacts with the apical region of secretory 
cells.8 Pan-keratin antibodies react with both epithelial and 
myoepithelial cells. Outside the myoepithelial cell layers, 
there is a continuous basement membrane or lamina that 
contains laminin or collagen type IV.8
Breast tissue responds to hormonal and other develop-
mental influences throughout life; thus, the breast displays 
a wide range of normal appearances.3-10 At birth, there is 
often palpable enlargement of the breast buds and secretion 
of colostrum. This results from exposure of the fetal breast 
to maternal hormones. These findings typically subside 1 
to 2 months post partum. Thereafter and until puberty, the 
breast is predominantly fibrofatty tissue containing branches 
of the primary duct system without lobule formation.
4:
Premature thelarche refers to isolated breast develop-
ment in the absence of additional signs of sexual matura-
tion, usually before 8 years of age.7 The clinical presentation 
is unilateral or bilateral subareolar discoid or nodular thick-
ening. This is a rare occurrence (affecting about 0.02% of 
white females).4 The enlargement may measure up to 7 cm, 
and it resembles gynecomastia microscopically (connective 
tissue containing increased numbers of ducts, without 
lobules, with mild epithelial hyperplasia of a solid or micro-
papillary configuration).4 The enlargement tends to regress 
slowly over 6 months to 6 years but in some cases may 
persist until puberty.4 Importantly, excision of this tissue 
results in amastia; thus, great caution must be applied 
before excision of breast tissue in this age group. Women 
with premature thelarche do not appear to have an increased 
risk of breast carcinoma, but they may experience preco-
cious puberty.4
At puberty, fibrofatty connective tissues increase and the 
TDLUs or lobules develop, culminating in a fully formed 
reproductive breast as already described. Subsequently, the 
hormonal fluctuations of the menstrual cycle cause mild 
changes in the breast parenchyma. These changes are 
uneven within the breast, but some generalizations can be 
made. Breast volume (i.e., water content and parenchymal 
growth) increases during the cycle, becoming maximal 
between days 16 and 28 (secretory phase) and least between 
days 6 and 15 (latter proliferative phase), which makes the 
latter part of the proliferative phase the optimal time for 
breast examination.4 During the proliferative phase, the 
TDLUs have a relatively dense cellular intralobular stroma, 
closed or small acinar lumens, occasional epithelial mitoses, 
and nonvacuolated myoepithelial cells. The duct luminal 
and myoepithelial cells are relatively indistinct. In contrast, 
during the secretory phase, the intralobular stroma is loose 
and edematous, and there are varying amounts of secretory 
material, absence of mitotic figures, and distinct vacuolated 
myoepithelial cells (see Fig. 19-4). Acinar lumens are more 
open, and there may be cytoplasmic projections from their 
luminal surfaces. Menstrual TDLUs show compact lobular 
glands, decreased stromal edema, and increased intralobu-
lar round cell (i.e., lymphocytic) infiltrate. With contracep-
tive therapy, there is often mild and transient breast pain 
during the first cycles. On microscopic examination, the 
only definite change caused by the medication is the devel-
opment of true acini resembling lactating breast.8
During pregnancy, the lobular units progressively 
undergo marked proliferation and enlargement. Eventually, 
the perilobular stroma diminishes and is displaced by 
hyperplastic and hypertrophied lobules that are closely 
apposed. Myoepithelial cells are inconspicuous. Intracyto-
plasmic secretion droplets (fat rich) accumulate within the 
duct luminal epithelial cells, and secretion begins to exude 
into the lumens. During lactation, the epithelial cells show 
vacuoles and cytoplasmic blebs along the luminal borders 
(Fig. 19-6). These changes may remain uneven within the 
breasts for up to 3 months after the cessation of breast-
feeding. This postgestational involution shows increased 
interlobular fibrofatty tissue, decreased numbers of acini, 
increased intralobular fibrous tissue, and eventual return to 
a normal reproductive morphologic appearance.
Pregnancy-like changes are sometimes found focally in 
the breast lobules of women who are neither pregnant nor 
lactating, in postmenopausal women,3-10 and even in men 
treated with estrogens.4 The incidence is reported to be 
1.7% to 3% in surgical pathology and autopsy material,4 and 
the cause is unknown. Pregnancy-like change is character-
ized by acinar epithelial cells showing frayed, vacuolated 
cytoplasm.3,4 Pregnancy-like hyperplasia refers to preg-
nancy-like change occurring in hyperplastic epithelium; 
this is much less common.4 Cytoplasm is frayed and vacu-
olated, but a micropapillary pattern, disorderly cellular 
arrangement, and sometimes nuclear atypia are also present 
(Fig. 19-7). The differential diagnosis includes clear cell 
change, cytoplasmic clearing in apocrine metaplasia, and 
intraepithelial reactive histiocytes.4,8 The cause of clear 
cell change is unknown, and it has no known clinical con-
sequences. It is composed of swollen acinar cells with 
abundant clear or pale, finely granular cytoplasm and 
small, round (sometimes centrally disposed) nuclei4 (Fig. 
19-8). Cytoplasmic clearing in apocrine metaplasia is focal 
and easily recognized when characteristic apocrine meta-
plasia is adjacent.
Small collections of foamy cells are not infrequent within 
duct lumens or in cohesive masses along duct walls (Fig. 
19-9), usually in cases of fibrocystic disease. Duct ectasia is 
associated with numerous foamy histiocytes, not only 
within ectatic duct lumens but also in the adjacent fibrous 
wall, which may not have an epithelial layer (Fig. 19-10). 
Plasma cells may be numerous in the wall as well (so-called 
plasma cell mastitis). Histiocytes are CD68 positive and 
cytokeratin negative; epithelial cells are keratin positive and 
usually CD68 negative.
After menopause, hormonal support for the breast is 
markedly reduced, and postmenopausal involution or 
atrophy occurs. There is a decrease in the cellularity and 
number of lobules, associated with thickening of lobular 
basement membranes and collagenization of intralobular 
stroma. This occurs in a heterogeneous fashion; some 
lobules are unaffected, whereas adjacent lobules are totally 
atrophic. There may be some mild duct ectasia and intralu-
minal microcalcification. This atrophy is attenuated by 
exogenous estrogen-containing medications.4




