Figure 19-1 n Benign breast tissue containing numerous terminal duct lobular units (TDLUs), which are composed of multiple acini clustered together in lobules (proliferative phase during the menstrual cycle). Within lobules, acini are separated by intralobular stroma, and the TDLUs or lobules are separated by interlobular stroma. During the proliferative phase, the TDLUs have a relatively dense cellular intralobular stroma, closed or small acinar lumens, occasional epithelial mitoses, and nonvacuolated myoepithelial cells. The duct luminal and myoepithelial cells are relatively indistinct.
Figure 19-2 n Subsegmental duct “feeding” a terminal duct lobular unit (TDLU). Menstrual TDLUs show compact lobular glands, decreased stromal edema, and increased intralobular round cell (i.e., lymphocytic) infiltrate, which is present in this TDLU.

Figure 19-3 n Breast lymphatics within the interlobular stroma are situated close to muscle arteries, as shown by tumor emboli within lymphatics. Breast lymphatics “hug” the arterial and venous systems, directing lymphatic flow along the course of the branches of the external thoracic and internal thoracic veins toward the axillary and internal mammary nodes.
Figure 19-4 n Breast acini showing an inner duct luminal layer and an outer myoepithelial layer (secretory phase of the menstrual cycle). During the secretory phase, the intralobular stroma is loose and edematous, and there are varying amounts of secretory material, absence of mitotic figures, and distinct vacuolated myoepithelial cells. Acinar lumens are more open, and there may be cytoplasmic projections from their luminal surfaces.
Figure 19-5 n A, Myoepithelial cells surround the duct luminal cells and contain smooth muscle actin, as shown by immunohistochemical staining. Smooth muscle actin stain can be helpful in distinguishing in situ breast carcinoma from invasive breast carcinoma, which does not have a myoepithelial cell layer. B, Antibody to gross cystic disease fluid protein-15 (GCDFP-15), an apocrine marker, reacts with the apices of the duct luminal cells and their secretions. GCDFP-15 is found in approximately 50% of breast carcinomas.

Figure 19-6 n Lactational changes in the breast. Vacuolated cytoplasm, vesicular nuclei, and nucleoli are features consistent with milk product synthesis and secretion and should not be confused with malignant atypia.

Figure 19-7 n A, Focal lactational changes in a postmenopausal breast; immediately adjacent acini show no lactational changes. B, Focal lactational changes with “hobnail” cells and mild cytologic atypia.
Figure 19-8 n Clear cell change or metaplasia. This feature should not be confused with clear cell ductal carcinoma in situ.

Figure 19-9 n A, Intraepithelial histiocytes. Also note the intraluminal histiocytes, which is a clue to the histiocytic nature of the intraepithelial cells. 
B, Intraepithelial histiocytes should not be confused with true pagetoid spread of carcinoma cells, shown here. Carcinoma cells show more nuclear atypia, have less distinct foamy cytoplasm, and react with antibodies to cytokeratin.
Figure 19-10 n Duct ectasia. A, Large cavity filled with amorphous debris and blood. B, Denuded wall and adherent foamy histiocytes extend into the adjacent fibrous tissues.
Figure 19-11 n Gynecomastia in a man. A, Note the absence of terminal duct lobular unit development. B, Papillary hyperplasia composed of bland stratified cells. This change (gynecomastoid hyperplasia) may occur rarely within the female breast.

